---
layout: post
title:  "An Enemy of the People vs Ganashastra - an Essay"
date:   2020-12-07 23:59:00 +0530
tags: enemy of the people ganashasra henrik ibsen satyajit ray assignment hs essay 
---

This is an essay I wrote for HS 305: Reading Literature, a course I took in my third year at IITB. 
The course had three segments, this is the second assignment of the third segment, whose pitch was 'This section will show how, in their different ways, creative artists either write or adapt texts in order to address issues that concern them and their readerships/audiences/viewerships'.

### The Problem Statement

Both Ibsen's play An Enemy of the People and Ray's cinematic adaptation of it, Ganashatru, represent an idealistic person in conflict with society. Given the differences between the play and the film, write an essay on whether you consider the film adaptation a successful one or a failure. Give reasons for your answer.

Readings:

* [Henrik Ibsen](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/2446/2446-h/2446-h.htm), An Enemy of the People

* [Satyajit Ray](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sku45oY_9Jc&ab&ab_channel=AnonymousINDIAN), Ganashastra

### The Essay

An Enemy of the People is an 1882 play by Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen. In
1990, Satyajit Ray adapted it as a movie titled Ganashastra. In this essay, I describe
my thoughts on whether I consider the film adaptation a successful one or a failure.

To start off, the movie employs a common thematic trope, one where the truth is
subjugated to hardship but eventually (and inevitably) triumphs. Ashoke Gupta in the
movie is shown to be a torchbearer of the truth, which is that the water in Bhuvanpulli is
indeed contaminated with jaundice-causing pathogens. Moreover, the movie ends with
chants of "Long live Ashoke Gupta" and Ashoke Gupta saying "I'm not alone", whereas
the book ends with Stockmann saying "the strongest man in the world is the one who
stands most alone". Clearly, the movie differs a lot from the novel it is based on,
especially in the key ideas of the doctor.

Thomas Stockmann's views were quite controversial. The book took a big twist when he
said "The most insidious enemy of truth and freedom among us is the solid majority". A
massive turmoil ensues and Dr. Stockmann becomes quite vindictive of the masses and
the majority. I reserve judgement about this, as I myself am quite vexed and need some
contemplating to form an opinion. Moreover, that is not the purpose of this essay.
However, we can surely agree that the movie has strayed a lot from the novel and
increasingly so as it progresses towards the climax. Ashoke accused Haridas of being
pseudo-progressive, of not taking risks, and of lacking a spine. Well, the movie itself did
not take the risks of portraying Ibsen's riveting play. I would guess that the reason Ray
went for a simpler plot was to appeal to a larger audience, which fundamentally breaks
the principle laid out by the doctor in the play, that the truth is not always with the
majority. Indeed, quite often the majority is majorly made up of uneducated or
uninterested people who will lap up anything as long as it is presented suitably to their
interests.

The movie further removes the extra angle and plotline of the doctor's foster-father,
Morten Kill. He mocked his step-son when he heard about the water contamination,
calling it monkeyshines, and then later bought all shares of the spa to manipulate
Stockmann into reversing his stand, holding Katherine and Petra's inheritance hostage.

In the movie, Ashoke Gupta collapses under stress towards the end, whereas
Stockmann's resolve goes from strength to strength as he brushes aside all his
opposition and takes the evictions of him and his daughter in his stride. He decides to
home-school his sons in order to make them "free-spirited and accomplished men".
Things do begin to look up for him but this is not due to the public coming to his rescue
and finally seeing the truth.

Another thing that bothered me was that religion was brought into the picture. Of
course, we must account for the cultural differences and it makes sense to replace the
spa with a temple so as to present a victim for Ashoke's discovery. However, the movie
decides to use this to this advantage, and instead of sticking to the tourism and revenue
line, introduces religion into the fray. It invents a character called Mr. Bhargava who is
the temple owner, who claims religious holy water cannot contain impurities. This is a
common misconception believed by many, I suspect, but it lends to the plot a science vs
religion angle. Is this effective? I concede it probably is. In fact, the way Ray adapted the
cultural setting of Norway of the 1880s into West Bengal of the 1990s is laudable, and
the actors have played their part well, particularly Nisith Gupta.

In conclusion, I would say the movie is not a successful adaptation of the novel. The
notion of success is in itself subjective, hence this analysis is more on the lines of an
opinion (corroborated with reasons, of course), which turns out to be leaning towards
one side. But trying to reason along these lines is surely worth the while.
