---
layout: post
title:  "Ubu Roi - an Analysis of Scenes"
date:   2020-08-29 22:00:00 +0530
tags: ubu roi alfred jarry assignment hs sharmishta henri bergson comic essay 
---

This is an essay I wrote for HS 305: Reading Literature, a course I took in my third year at IITB. 
The course had three segments, this is the second assignment of the first segment, which was on Comedy.

### The Problem Statement
Has been lost to time. Best I can remember, it was something along the lines of 'Analyze Ubu Roi from the lens of Bergson's essay'.

Readings:
[Alfred Jarry](https://www.patakosmos.com/database-open-access/king-ubu-alfred-jarry.pdf), Ubu Roi;
[Henri Bergson](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/4352/4352-h/4352-h.htm), Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic

### The Essay

Ubu Roi was a bizarre play written by Alfred Jarry which empathized with the zeitgeist
of the late 19th century. This was when a large community of artists were detesting the
bourgeois taste of the profiteering class and wanted to break free. The purpose of this
short essay is to peruse Ubu Roi against the backdrop of Henry Bergson's essay on the
meaning of the comic, by analyzing a few scenes.

The play starts off by establishing what it professes to be, a wild, absurd, and ludicrous
tale. Act 1, Scene 1 begins with Papa Ubu and Mama Ubu talking to each other,
employing abuses and threats in a simple filthy language. It brings to mind Bergson's idea
of how "the comic does not exist outside the pale of what is strictly human" (p. 4a).
Indeed, Papa Ubu is the hero (antihero?) of the play. It is his actions and decisions which
propel the story forward and incite peals of laughter. Another of Bergson's themes, that
of "the body taking precedence of the soul" (p. 18b), presents itself to the mind here, as
the gargantuan stomach and fat arse of Papa Ubu are often spoken of.

Another scene of interest is when Papa Ubu, having become King, condemns the
Nobles to death. He asks each of them about their wealth and their titles, then despite the
disparity in their replies, sends them 'into the hole' to be debrained. This is a critique of
institutions and what they stand for (nobility, clergy, etc.), which is just one example of
the influence of Francois Rabalais in Jarry's works. This scene also exhibits the mechanical
inelasticity with which Papa Ubu performs mass murder, the sole motive of which is to
amass a fortune and add to 'his list of his possessions'. Moreover, it is the cold
euphemistic way Jarry writes about this genocidal bloodbath which makes it humorous.
To quote Bergson, "laughter has no greater foe than emotion" (p. 4b). Furthermore, Jarry
portrays the ruthless attitude assumed by Ubu as archetypical of the bourgeois, which is
also in the same vein as Rabalais' work.

A third scene, which occurs much later, provides some more insight. This is when
Mama Ubu enters the cave and converses with a sleepy Papa Ubu who takes her to be an
angelic ghost. It is a most amusing dialogue wherein Mama Ubu tries to make Papa Ubu
talk of her in a divine light (charming, adorable, perfect) and he, oblivious to the fact that
he's talking to his wife, keeps insulting her (minx, rogue, fathead). Papa Ubu claims to love
Mama Ubu but speaks words full of ill-will behind her back, which lampoons the
opposition in words and actions of Ubu (again archetypical of the bourgeois), much like
Rabalais used to.

This essay concludes with a beautiful quote from Bergson about the comic spirit. "It
dreams, I admit, but it conjures up, in its dreams, visions that are at once accepted and
understood by the whole of a social group" (p. 3b). Indeed, trying to shed light on the
nature of the comic is a Herculean task, but the pursuit may very well be worth the while.
